---
id: 203
title: Getting to New York
date: 2010-04-07T08:00:46+00:00
author: Daniel
layout: post
guid: http://northhorizon.net/?p=203
permalink: /2010/getting-to-new-york-part-2/
categories:
  - Life in NYC
tags:
  - 'C#'
  - Interviews
  - Lab49
  - WPF
---
_Continued from [Part I](http://northhorizon.net/2010/getting-to-new-york-part-1/).[_Continued from [Part I](http://northhorizon.net/2010/getting-to-new-york-part-1/).](http://northhorizon.net/2010/getting-to-new-york-part-1/)_ 

## Part II. On the Phone

Sunday evening, January 18, I decided it might be a good idea to brush up on my .NET framework knowledge to prepare for my interview the next morning. Judging by the latter questions of Lab49’s “preliminary screening test,” these guys really didn’t mess around. I pulled off my bookshelf my trusty copy of [CLR via C#](http://www.amazon.com/CLR-via-Dev-Pro-Jeffrey-Richter/dp/0735627045), which is, in my opinion, the best book you can read if you really want to take your understanding of C# and .NET from “intermediate” to “expert”. C#  Developers: no excuses, read this book cover to cover. As it turns out, my interviewer, Nick, must be a fan of the same book. When he called me that Monday morning, after introducing himself, Nick threw me a couple softballs before turning up the heat. I was queried at length about generics, delegates, anonymous methods, and the garbage collector (among other things), all of which I was more than happy to explicate in the greatest of detail, having refreshed myself on their inner workings the night before. Nick’s attention then turned to the newer .NET 3.5 features, which I had been using for almost two years, and I was more than happy to talk about those, too. I must admit, he stumped me on a concept called “attached behaviors”. I was familiar with attached properties, but it wasn’t until recently that I’ve become fully aware of attached behaviors. I’ll have another article discussing what I learned in the future.

After Nick finished grilling me for information, I had my turn to ask him questions. I seem to remember having a list of things to talk about, but I was suffering from some strange variant of vertigo, so I went with my usual developer talking points. For the record, Nick is one of the nicest guys ever. As I would find out later, Lab49 is composed solely of superb people. You may be thinking that I’m generalizing or hyperbolizing, but in all seriousness, I have yet to find a single bad apple or even mildly distasteful person at Lab49. Every time I think I’ve found one, they prove me wrong. Even the Java guys are top notch, and that’s saying something. In any case, I finished the interview enjoying a discussion of the usual programmer minutiae, talking about podcasts and developer philosophy. I’m not sure if it’s normal for one to feel a sense of camaraderie with his interviewer, but I know I sure did.<!--more-->

Later that day, I received an email from James, a Recruitment Coordinator at Lab49, asking for a “telephone conversation” with Nemo, the Director of Recruitment. I figured it was one of those psychological profiles one of my friends had been subjected to in a recent interview. I don’t think I could have been more wrong. The next morning, Nemo called, introduced himself, asked for clarification on a few points of my résumé, and opened himself up for questions. I asked him the usual questions on how Lab49 was structured, the promotion strategy, and what Lab49 does in general.

Nemo explained to me that Lab49 is somewhat loosely structured, with no real middle management. As projects start and finish, you report to the project manager and engagement manager, but every project is custom-tailored to the clients’ needs. I pressed Nemo to explain how a successful company works without the infrastructure almost every company of equal size has. Nemo couldn’t really explain how it worked, but only that it did, and quite well. Some may say, “when the cat’s away,” but I might interject that maybe without the threat of imminent death, a mouse might be more free to do something more constructive with its time than cower for its life.

Coming from a consulting background, I could really tell Lab49 really is a consulting firm in the greatest sense of the term. The answer to everything is, “it depends,” and, “what the client needs,” which is clearly working out well for them, but can be frustrating trying to pin down something concrete on which to make a decision. In general, Labbers work on-site with the clients to best make use of human and information resources. In my opinion, there’s definitely a beneficial side effect to it: when Lab49 is working side-by-side with the client, the work has a face, rather than some unknown bunch of people dropping code in a folder every week or two.

Nemo continued by telling me that Lab49 has titles out of necessity, but they don’t play as much of a role as in other companies. I really appreciated that. Being a young guy, it’s typically difficult for me to get my ideas out in a space where I’ve got a title that’s easily negligible. I can say with authority that’s not been the case at Lab49. Every day I work with guys who have decades of experience on me, but are interested to hear what I have to say. It’s not about seniority; it’s about being the best at what you do and bringing new and innovative ideas to the table. For that very reason, I prefer to keep my title to myself. There’s no real company policy on the publicity of your title, but it’s not on my business card and I certainly wouldn’t wear it on my sleeve.

Nemo concluded the interview by saying that Daniel Chait, one of the founders of Lab49 would want to talk to me over Skype before an in-person interview. That was the first time anyone had said anything about an in-person interview, and while I had expected it at some point, I couldn’t help but be excited to see some light at the end of the tunnel. I confidently told Nemo that I was available for the remainder of the day, which might have caught him a bit off-guard. He said Daniel was a busy guy and he’d see when he was available. I was confirmed for later that afternoon by email not too long after hanging up.

I’m not sure if it was then or later that I started feeling extremely skeptical of this Lab49 place. I remember telling my friend, Chris, that, “I know Nirvana Corp burned down, but Lab49 makes me wonder,” quoting from an [episode](http://www.tv.com/video/15935/the-competition) of _Dilbert, The Animated Series_.  I found it difficult to believe that such a place could exist, so little was my faith in humanity, let alone developers.

I then realized I was about to have my fourth communiqué with a company in three business days, whereas almost no Dallas-based company had insomuch as replied in a week.  _These guys really don’t mess around_, I remember thinking.

At 3:00 PM and after a few quirky Skype issues, I was on webcam with Daniel Chait, now fully appreciating the extra money I’d spent on a [nice webcam](http://www.newegg.com/Product/Product.aspx?Item=N82E1682610407). Chait went over my experience thoroughly, fully examining the roles I had played on each team. I’m not sure why, but at times I felt very intimidated. It’s perplexing because going over the conversation in my head Daniel wasn’t in the least bit condescending nor indirect in his questions. We discussed my work in WPF and LINQ and lambda expressions. Having taken Advanced Programming Languages and feeling like (but by no means) an expert in functional languages, I was glad to be on more solid ground. I had a compulsion to share with Daniel a couple extension methods I had written to succinctly state an equation in lambda. Unfortunately, since it was a compulsion I wasn’t prepared at all with the code snippet. I brought up my Machine Learning projects folder, which I knew it was in but couldn’t remember exactly which project I had written the extension for. Fumbling around, I must have spent a full five minutes of awkward silence finding the thing, which seemed anti-climactic for such a long wait, and even more so for me, since it felt like an eternity.

Afterward, I told my roommate that I wasn’t sure how that interview had gone. It was without a doubt by my estimation my weakest interview, and likewise the most important. I spent a little while going over the events, trying to find out why I felt I had done so poorly. All I can say is that I feel very confident of my technical skills and far less strongly about my experience, which was a major focus of Chait’s interview. That and that awkward silence.  I told myself that if they wanted a guy with more experience, that was a perfectly legitimate reason not to go forward, and I shouldn’t be worried about it. And if they rejected me outright for not having that bit of code on hand, they could go to Hell.

I was glad some of my friends wanted to go out that night so I could get my mind off the whole thing. When I got back, there was an email from James waiting for me, inviting me to New York for an in-person interview. I slept well that night.

The next day I made reservations airfare and lodging and ran both by James, as Lab49 kindly picked up the tab. It might be standard operating procedure for companies, but the fact is that they don’t have to do it, and I would have paid for the ticket myself if they hadn’t. Now all that was left to do was wait out the week and familiarize myself as best I could with my travel plans.

Clearly this company had their act together and was vigorously pursuing this discovery period. I was also reacquainting myself with the ever-greater possibility of leaving everything for New York. My father was supportive, and because he’s not usually too keen on my adventures, I took it for a good sign. That being the case, I started warming my close family and friends up to the idea that I might end up in New York. Most of them were surprised, marveling at the apparent spontaneity and haste in the whole process. Only months before had I told them I’d be staying in Dallas for the “foreseeable future” as a consultant writing software for my own company.

Who knew the foreseeable future was so short?